title: "Monte: Typhon and SmallCaps"
type: entry
category: entries
datetime: 2015-02-14 13:51:00
---

Two years of having a real job have made me bitter and grumpy, so I'm gonna
stop with the cutesy blog post titles.

Today, I'm gonna talk a bit about `Monte`_. Specifically, I'm going to talk
about `Typhon`_'s current virtual machine. Typhon used to use an abstract
syntax tree interpreter ("AST interpreter") as its virtual machine. It now
uses a variant of the SmallCaps bytecode machine. I'll explain how and why.

When I started designing Typhon, I opted for an AST VM because it seemed like
it matched Monte's semantics well. Monte is an **expression language**, which
means that every syntactic node is an expression which can be evaluated to a
single value. Monte is side-effecting, so evaluation must happen in an
environment which can record the side effects. An AST interpreter could have
an object representing each syntactic node, and each node could be evaluated
within an environment to produce a value.

.. sourcecode:: python

    class Node(object):

        def evaluate(self, environment):
            pass

Subclasses of ``Node`` can override ``evaluate()`` to have behavior specific
to that node. The ``Assign`` class can assign values to names in the
environment, the ``Object`` class can create new objects, and the ``Call``
class can pass messages to objects. This technique is amenable to `RPython`_,
since ``Node.evaluate()`` has the same signature for all nodes.

How well does this work with the RPython just-in-time ("JIT") compiler? It
does alright. The JIT has little problem seeing that the nodes are
compile-time constant, and `promotion`_ applied strategically allows the JIT
to see into things like ``Call`` nodes, which cause methods to be inlined
relatively well. However, there are some problems.

The first problem is that Monte has no syntactic loops. Since RPython's JIT is
designed to compile loops, this means that some extra footwork is needed to
set up the JIT. I took Monte's looping object, ``__loop``, and extended it to
detect when its argument is likely to yield a JIT trace. The detection is
simple, examining whether the loop body is a user-defined object and only
entering the JIT when that is the case. In theory, most bodies will be
user-defined, since Monte turns this:

.. sourcecode:: monte

    object SubList:
        to coerce(specimen, ej):
            def [] + l exit ej := specimen
            for element in l:
                subguard.coerce(element, ej)
            return specimen

…into this:

.. sourcecode:: monte

    object SubList:
        method coerce(specimen, ej):
            def via (__splitList.run([0])) [l] exit ej := specimen
            var validFlag__6 := true
            try:
                __loop.run([l, object _ {
                    method run(_, value__8) {
                        __validateFor.run([validFlag__6])
                        subguard.coerce([value__8, ej])
                        null
                    }
                }])
            finally:
                validFlag__6 := false
            specimen

This example is from Typhon's `prelude`_. The expansion of loops, and other
syntax, is defined to turn the full Monte language into a smaller language,
Kernel-Monte, which resembles Kernel-E. Now, in this example, the nonce loop
object generated by the expander is very custom, and probably couldn't be
simplified any further. However, it is theoretically possible that an
optimizer could detect loops that call a single method repeatedly and simplify
them more aggressively. In practice, that optimization doesn't exist, so
Typhon thinks that all loops are user-defined and allows the JIT to trace all
of them.

The next hurdle has to do with names. Monte's namespaces are static, which
means that it's possible to always know in advance which names are in a scope.
This is a powerful property for compilers, since it opens up many kinds of
compilation and lowering which aren't available to languages with dynamic
namespaces like Python. However, Typhon doesn't have access to the scoping
information from the expander, only the AST. This means that Typhon has to
redo most of the name and scope analysis in order to figure out things like
how big namespaces should be and where to store everything. I initially did
all of this at runtime, in the JIT, but it is very slow. This is because the
JIT has problems seeing into dictionaries, and it cannot trust that a
dictionary is actually constant-size or constant-keyed.

RPython does have an answer to this, called **virtual** and **virtualizable
objects**. A virtual object is one that is never constructed within a JIT
trace, because the JIT knows that the object won't leave the trace and can be
totally elided. (The literature talks at length of "escape analysis", the
formal term for this.) Typhon's AST nodes occasionally generated virtual
objects, but only rarely, because most objects are assigned to names in the
environment, and the JIT refuses to ignore modifications to the environment.

Virtualizable objects solve this problem neatly. A virtualizable object has
one or more attributes, called virtualizable attributes, which can be
"out-of-sync" during a JIT trace. A virtualizable can delay being updated,
as long as it's updated at some point before the end of the JIT trace. RPython
allows fields of integers and floating-point values to be virtualizable, as
well as constant-size lists. However, Typhon uses mappings of names for its
environments, backed by dictionaries, and dictionaries can't be virtualizable.

The traditional solution to this problem involves assigning an index to every
name within a scope, and using a constant-size list with the indices. I did
this, but it was arduous and didn't have the big payoff that I had wanted. Why
not? Well, every AST node introduces a new scope! This caused scope creation
to be expensive. I realized that I needed to compute closures as well.

Around this time, a few months ago, I began to despair because debugging the
AST VM is hard. RPython's JIT logging and tooling is all based around the
assumption that there is a low-level virtual machine of some sort which has
instructions and encapsulation, and the AST was just too hard to manage in
this way. I had had to invent my own tracebacks, my own logging, and my own
log viewer. This wasn't going well. I wanted to join the stack-based VM crew
and not have piles of ASTs to slog through whenever something wasn't going
right. So, I decided to try to implement SmallCaps, from `E`_. E, of course,
is the inspiration for Monte, and shares many features with Monte. SmallCaps
was based on old Smalltalk systems, but was designed to work with unique E
features like ejectors.

So, enough talk, time for some code. First, let's lay down some ground rules.
These are the guiding semantics of SmallCaps in Typhon. Keep in mind that we
are describing a single-stack automaton with a side stack for exception
handling and an environment with frames for local values and closed-over
"global" values.

* All expressions return a value. Therefore, an expression should always
  compile to some instructions which start with an empty stack and leave a
  single value on the stack.
* All patterns perform some side effects in the environment and return
  nothing. Therefore, they should compile to instructions which consume two
  values from the stack (specimen and ejector) and leave nothing.
* When an exception handler is required, every handler must be dropped when
  it's no longer needed.

With these rules, the compiler's methods become very obvious.

.. sourcecode:: python

    class Str(Node):
        """
        A literal string.
        """

        def compile(self, compiler):
            index = compiler.literal(StrObject(self._s))

Strings are compiled into a single ``LITERAL`` instruction that places a
string on the stack. Simple enough.

.. sourcecode:: python

    class Sequence(Node):
        """
        A sequence of nodes.
        """

        def compile(self, compiler):
            for node in self._l[:-1]:
                node.compile(compiler)
                compiler.addInstruction("POP", 0)
            self._l[-1].compile(compiler)

Here we compile sequences of nodes by compiling each node in the sequence, and
then using ``POP`` to remove each intermediate node's result, since they
aren't used. This nicely mirrors the semantics of sequences, which are to
evaluate every node in the sequence and then return the value of the ultimate
node's evaluation.

This also shows off a variant on the `Visitor pattern`_ which `Allen`_,
`Mike`_, and I are calling the "Tourist pattern", where an accumulator is
passed from node to node in the structure and recursion is directed by each
node. This makes managing the `Expression Problem`_ much easier, since nodes
completely contain all of the logic for each accumulation, and makes certain
transformations much easier. More on that in a future post.

.. sourcecode:: python

    class FinalPattern(Pattern):

        def compile(self, compiler):
            # [specimen ej]
            if self._g is None:
                compiler.addInstruction("POP", 0)
                # [specimen]
            else:
                self._g.compile(compiler)
                # [specimen ej guard]
                compiler.addInstruction("ROT", 0)
                compiler.addInstruction("ROT", 0)
                # [guard specimen ej]
                compiler.call(u"coerce", 2)
                # [specimen]
            index = compiler.addFrame(u"_makeFinalSlot")
            compiler.addInstruction("NOUN_FRAME", index)
            compiler.addInstruction("SWAP", 0)
            # [_makeFinalSlot specimen]
            compiler.call(u"run", 1)
            index = compiler.addLocal(self._n)
            compiler.addInstruction("BINDSLOT", index)
            # []

This pattern is compiled to insert a specimen into the environment, compiling
the optional guard along the way and ensuring order of operations. The
interspersed comments represent the top of stack in-between operations,
because it helps me keep track of how things are compiled.

With this representation, the ``Compiler`` is able to see the names and
indices of every binding introduced during compilation, which means that
creating index-based frames as constant-size lists is easy. (I was going to
say "trivial," but it was not trivial!)

I was asked on IRC about why I chose to adapt SmallCaps instead of other
possible VMs. The answer is mostly that SmallCaps was designed and implemented
by people that were much more experienced than me, and that I trust their
judgement. I tried several years ago to design a much purer concatenative
semantics for Kernel-E, and failed. SmallCaps works, even if it's not the
simplest thing to implement. I did briefly consider even smaller semantics,
like those of the Self language, but I couldn't find anything expressive
enough to capture all of Kernel-E's systems. Ejectors are tricky.

That's all for now. Peace.

.. _Monte: http://github.com/monte-language
.. _Typhon: http://github.com/monte-language/typhon
.. _RPython: http://rpython.rtfd.org/
.. _promotion: http://morepypy.blogspot.com/2011/03/controlling-tracing-of-interpreter-with_15.html
.. _prelude: https://github.com/monte-language/typhon/blob/master/mast/prelude.mt
.. _E: http://erights.org/
.. _Allen: http://washort.twistedmatrix.com/
.. _Mike: http://www.mythmon.com/
.. _Visitor pattern: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visitor_pattern
.. _Expression Problem: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expression_problem
